# DATA LAKE PROJECT

## Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

This project is about building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow the analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs the users are listening to.

This project is for applying what we have learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. 


The steps for this project is as follows:

1. Loading data from S3.
2. Process the data into analytics tables using Spark.
3. Load them back into S3.
4. This will be deployed on AWS cluster.


## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using two datasets (song and log datasets), a star schema is created to optimize the queries on song play analysis.

### Song and log datasets

The datasets are stored in s3 bucket at `us-west-2` region as JSON files. The two datasets are names log_data and song_data. The song_data dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset while the log_data is generated by this event simulator based on the song_data.

- song_data path example: song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
- log_data path example: log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


### Fact Table

- songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
- users - users in the app [user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level]
- songs - songs in music database [song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration]
- artists - artists in music database [artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude]
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units 
  [start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday]


# Project Contents

The project consist of the main ETL python module. (`etl.py`),
a configuration file (`dl.cfg`), and a jupyter notebook (`etl.ipynb`) that does the same as the python ETL module.

- etl.py - reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3.
- etl.ipynb - Does the same as `etl.py` and can run directly on AWS EMR notebook. 
-  dl.cfg - contains your AWS credentials.